[WIP] Refactor Migration Guides (#386)
fluxcd/website: content/en/docs/migration/helm-migration.md

---
title: "Migrate to the Helm Controller"
linkTitle: "Migrate from the Helm Operator"
description: "How to migrate from Helm Operator to Flux v2 and its Helm controller."
weight: 30
card:
  name: migration
  weight: 20
---

## Prerequisites

- Completed initial migration with the Flux migration guide

## Migration strategy

> Due to the high number of changes to the API spec, there are no detailed instructions available to provide a simple migration path. But there is a [simple procedure to follow](#steps), which combined with the detailed list of [API spec changes](#api-spec-changes) should make the migration path relatively easy.

Author: There are 3 different methods for migrating resources across

- All at once
- Gradual with scaledown
- Gradual without scaledown

During migration, you need to change your manifests to be compatible with the new type, this involves
- defining a source `HelmRepository`, `GitRepository`, `Bucket`
- defining a `HelmRelease`
For more information about the changes see the api changes, and the guide on how to release helm

- Deleting a `CustomResourceDefinition` will also delete all custom resources of that kind.
- If both the Helm Controller and Helm Operator are running, and both a new and old custom resources define a release, they will fight over the release.
- The Helm Controller will always perform an upgrade the first time it encounters a new `HelmRelease` for an existing release; this is [due to the changes to release mechanics and bookkeeping](#helm-storage-drift-detection-no-longer-relies-on-dry-runs).

The safest way to upgrade is to avoid deletions and fights by stopping the Helm Operator. Once the operator is not running, it is safe to deploy the Helm Controller (e.g., by following the [Get Started guide](../get-started/index.md), [utilizing `flux install`](../cmd/flux_install.md), or using the manifests from the [release page](https://github.com/fluxcd/helm-controller/releases)), and start replacing the old resources with new resources. You can keep the old resources around during this process, since the Helm Controller will ignore them.

## Steps

The recommended migration steps for a single `HelmRelease` are as follows:

> 1. Ensure the Helm Operator is not running, as otherwise the Helm Controller and Helm Operator will fight over the release.

Author: ```suggestion
1. Stop the Helm Operator.
1. Check the Helm Operator is not running.
{{% alert color="info" color="warning" title="'flux bootstrap' target" %}}
If the Helm Operator is still running, it will conflict with the Helm Controller when trying to deploy releases.
{{% /alert %}}
```

  namespace: default
spec:
  chart:
    repository: https://stefanprodan.github.io/podinfo
    name: podinfo
    version: 5.0.3
  values:
    replicaCount: 1
```

The custom resources for the Helm Controller would be:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta1
kind: HelmRepository
metadata:
  name: podinfo
  namespace: default
spec:
  interval: 10m
  url: https://stefanprodan.github.io/podinfo
---
apiVersion: helm.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v2beta1
kind: HelmRelease
metadata:
  name: podinfo
  namespace: default
spec:
  interval: 5m
  releaseName: default-podinfo
  chart:
    spec:
      chart: podinfo
      version: 5.0.3
      sourceRef:
        kind: HelmRepository
        name: podinfo
      interval: 10m
  values:
    replicaCount: 1
```

### Migrating gradually

Gradually migrating to the Helm Controller is possible by scaling down the Helm Operator while you move over resources, and scaling it up again once you have migrated some of the releases to the Helm Controller.

While doing this, make sure that once you scale up the Helm Operator again, there are no old and new `HelmRelease` resources pointing towards the same release, as they will fight over the release.

> Alternatively, you can gradually migrate per namespace without ever needing to shut the Helm Operator down, enabling no continuous delivery interruption on most namespaces. To do so, you can customize the Helm Operator roles associated to its `ServiceAccount` to prevent it from interfering with the Helm Controller in namespaces you are migrating. First, create a new `ClusterRole` for the Helm Operator to operate in "read-only" mode cluster-wide:

Author: Two distinct patterns for migration here

- Gradual with scaledown
- Gradual without scaledown

Need to break out into step by step instructions.
